.TH GPSDRIVE 1
.SH NAME
gpsdrive \- displays GPS position on a map
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gpsdrive [options]

.SH About this manual page

This manual page explains the basic functions of \fBGpsDrive\fR 2.10
and additional information regarding map setup and interfacing with
support software.

Within \fBGpsDrive\fR nearly all buttons have tooltips and there is also
a HELP window describing the usage of mouse buttons and keyboard shortcuts.

For additional information concerning advanced topics consult the
specialized README files, e.g. README.kismet, etc.


.SH DESCRIPTION

.B GpsDrive 
is a car (bike, ship, plane, foot) navigation system.  It will
display your position on a map, record your track, and a number of
other handy functions.

\fBGpsDrive\fR connects to a GPS receiver and displays your position
on a zoomable map. The maps are auto-selected depending on your
position. You can choose the preferred map scale, which the
program then tries to match from the available maps. Basic worldwide
maps are provided and tools are included to help you add your own
localized maps.

.B GpsDrive
will work with the vast majority of GPS receivers which output NMEA
sentences to a serial device, and any USB GPS binary protocol known
to the \fBGpsd\fR software, which handles the back-end communication
for \fBGpsDrive\fR. See the \fBGpsd\fR website
(\fIhttp://gpsd.berlios.de\fR) for an extensive list of GPS receivers
known to work with that software. In most cases your GPS will "just work".

"\fBGpsd\fR is a service daemon that monitors one or more GPSes attached
to a host computer through serial or USB ports, making all data on the
location/course/velocity of the sensors available to be queried on
a TCP port of the host computer. With \fBgpsd\fR, multiple GPS client
applications (such as navigational and wardriving software) can share
access to GPSes without contention or loss of data."

You must install and launch \fBgpsd\fR before running \fBGpsDrive\fR.


.SH DISCLAIMER
.B Do not use GpsDrive as a primary means of navigation!
.br
.B Keep your eyes on the road and hands on the wheel.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License (GPL) for more details.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-?, --help
Displays a short help message.
.TP
.B \-e, --embedded
Don't show the GUI; for use in external GTK apps.
.TP
.B \-f, --force-position
Force display of position even if the GPS fix is invalid. Before a GPS has a
fix it often reports its position as 0,0. And if it has lost a fix some makes
of GPS will repeat the last known position together with a fix-is-bad indicator.
Normally (without this flag) \fBGpsDrive\fR skips plotting these points.
Useful for debugging.
.TP
.B \-i, --ignore-checksum
Ignore NMEA checksum. (risky, only for broken GPS receivers)
.TP
.B \-p, --explore-mode
Start in Explore Mode. This will let you explore around your maps
independently of your GPS position (or lack thereof).
.TP
.B \-s, --nosplash
Don't show the startup splash screen.
.TP
.B \-t, --touchscreen
Set this special mode if you only have a single mouse button, for example
when using \fBGpsDrive\fR on a touchscreen display.
.TP
.B \-v, --verbose
Displays some basic debug information to the terminal as the program runs.
.TP
.B \-x, --use-DBUS
Use DBUS for communication with \fBgpsd\fR; this disables socket communication.
.TP
.B \-A, --alt-offset=\fI<OFFSET>\fR
Adjust the displayed altitude by adding this value.
.TP
.B \-B, --gpsd-server=\fI<SERVER>\fR
Server name of the NMEA server. You can connect your GPS receiver to a
remote \fIhost\fR which is running \fBgpsd\fR and display the position
on your local machine.
.TP
.B \-C, --config-file=\fI<FILE>\fR
Set this if you wish to use an alternative configuration file.
.TP
.B \-D, --debug=\fI<LEVEL>\fR
Set the debugging level. A level of 0 will show no debug information,
while a level of 100 will show \fBa lot\fR of debugging information.
If you have problems or program crashes, set this high enough to display
relevant information send this output to the authors.
See also the \fBBUGS\fR section below.
.TP
.B \-F, --friends-server=\fI<SERVERFILE>\fR
Select a friends server to exchange position information with other
people, e.g. \fIfriendsd.gpsdrive.de\fR.
You can also set this from the Preferences/Friends menu.
You can start your own friends server with the included \fBfriendsd\fR program.
More details are in the \fBFRIENDSD\fR section below.
.TP
.B \-G, --geometry=\fI<GEOMETRY>\fR
Specify the window geometry, e.g. 800x600.
.TP
.B \-M, --gui-mode=\fR[\fIcar\fR|\fIpda\fR|\fIdesktop\fR]
Set GUI mode. The default layout is '\fIdesktop\fR'. \fICar\fR modes sets
up the display in a fullscreen mode suitable for use with a small LCD
touchscreen. \fIPDA\fR mode dedicates even more screen real-estate to
the map, controls are hidden behind tabs.
.TP
.B \-N, --nmeaout=\fI<FILE>\fR
Set a serial device, PTY master, or file to send NMEA sentences to.
This is useful if you use \fBGpsDrive\fR in simulation mode to provide
other GPS applications with test data.
.TP
.B \-S, --screenshot=\fI<PATH>\fR
Take auto-screenshots of different GUI windows then exit. Image files will
be saved to the specified \fIpath\fR. Don't touch gpsdrive while this is
running!
.TP
.B \-T, --run-test
Run some internal unit tests and then exit.
.TP
.B \--version
Shows the program version together with the SVN revision of the main
gpsdrive.c source. If you send a bug report, also include this output.
.TP
.B \--display=\fI<DISPLAY>\fR
The X-Window display to use.


.SH CONNECTING A GPS RECEIVER

.B Start GPSD
.br
This program runs as daemon in background and provides a server
which sends the GPS data on port number 2947. You can download and
learn more about \fBgpsd\fR at \fIhttp://gpsd.berlios.de\fR.

Once \fBgpsd\fR is running you can monitor the raw NMEA output of your GPS
with \fBtelnet localhost 2947\fR and after the connection is made hit the 
\fBR\fR key to see the NMEA sentences. You can use the \fBxgps\fR
program that comes with \fBgpsd\fR for a more comprehensive test.

If you have connected a GPS receiver, and are successfully communicating
with it, you will see GpsDrive's signal strength indicator turn from red to
green. By clicking on the signal strength indicator you can open the
\fISatellite Info\fR window which will show you information about the
satellites in view.

To calculate a 2D position the GPS must have at least 3 satellites in view.
To calculate altitude you need at least 4 satellites. The antenna of your GPS
receiver must have free sight to the sky, so you cannot expect to use it
indoors. More satellites gives you a better accuracy.

If your receiver can not see enough satellites with a usable signal,
the signal level indicator is red. If your signal is ok and gives a valid
position, the \fISatellite Info\fR indicator is green.

You can restart the connection to \fBgpsd\fR in the GPS tab of the
\fIPreferences\fR menu.


.SH USAGE

Start GpsDrive as a normal user with:
.B gpsdrive
from your shell, if you want another language see the \fILOCALISATION\fR
section.

On some distributions you may find a "\fBGpsDrive\fR" entry in your
Gnome or KDE menu.

It is important that you have installed GpsDrive as root, so it can
find the necessary files. 
.B Don't start GpsDrive as root!

You can use GpsDrive without a GPS device connected.
GpsDrive can automatically start in \fBSimulation mode\fR
if no working GPS receiver is connected and no \fBgpsd\fR
is running. The GPS signal level indicator is replaced with a message
indicating the mode.

In simulation mode the pointer will move by itself on the map towards
the target position. It may be switched permanently on or off in the
\fIPreferences\fR menu.


.SS Modes Of Operation

\fBGpsDrive\fR operates in three modes:

.B Normal mode:
.br
This mode is entered if you have a GPS receiver connected. The cursor is at
the position your GPS receiver sends.
.br
Black and red arrows show your position on the map. The \fBred arrow\fR
points to your selected target (aka "\fIBearing\fR"), and the \fBblack arrow\fR
shows the direction in which you are moving (aka "\fIHeading\fR").
.br
When the GPS is not sending a valid position the arrows blink.

.B Simulation mode
.br
If GpsDrive does not find a GPS receiver when the program starts, it
shows the last known position and the cursor will move towards the target
you set. You can set the target with a right-mouse click on the map or by
selecting a waypoint from the \fIFind\fR dialog. The target appears as a
cross-hair and is available in all modes.

.B Explore mode
.br
In this mode you can temporarily change the cursor position for looking
around and jumping to other positions (e.g. for downloading maps). The
lat/lon position shown in the dashboard is that of the current \fBmouse
position\fR.
.br
This mode is selected by ticking the "Explore mode" box in the
\fIMap Control\fR window, or if you "Jump to POI" in the \fIFind\fR window.
The \fIJump\fR button simply jumps to the current target, so it is useful
to move the target to a waypoint/POI first by selecting one from the list.
.br
In this mode GpsDrive \fBdoes not show your real position\fR and the
positioning arrows are replaced with a box.
.br
You can relocate your position with a simple left-mouse click on the map
or with the arrow keys (including diagonals on the keypad). Maps are
automatically scrolled or load the next map when you click near the border.
.br
To leave Explore Mode untick the "Explore mode" entry in the
\fIMap Control\fR window, or middle or right-mouse click on the map. If
a right-mouse click is used the target is reset to that position in the
process.


You can change the preferred map scale with mouse wheel, or if there is no
mouse wheel, with Shift-left and right mouse click.
This works from any mode.

Please have a look in the \fBHelp\fR menu in GpsDrive to learn more
about available keyboard shortcuts and mouse functions.


.SH MAPS

.SS OpenStreetMap Maps

GpsDrive now supports OSM maps with the help of the Mapnik renderer.
To activate this mode you have to build GpsDrive with the Mapnik option
enabled.


.SS Map Download

You can easily download maps from the internet with the \fBDownload\fR
tool. This is found in the Options -> Maps menu. A preview of already
downloaded maps near to the current preferred mapscale are shown as yellow
rectangles drawn over the map. The area to be downloaded is drawn as a
green rectangle over the map. Reposition the area to be downloaded with
a left-mouse click. Map scales given in the GUI for OpenStreetMap tiles
are only approximate, the true scale at the selected latitude will be
calculated when the map is downloaded - this can vary by up to 50% at
high latitudes and is a limitation of the popular Web Tile method.
LANDSAT maps use a WMS server and will match the requested scale exactly.

If you have Mapnik set up you can also use the
\fIgpsdrive_mapnik_gentiles\fR utility to pre-render maps of varying
scale directly from your PostGIS database.
There is also a program called \fIgpsfetchmap.pl\fR provided with GpsDrive
which can be used to automatically download a series of maps covering a
larger area from a number of online map servers.
.br
.B Please consider the copyright information and terms of service
of map providers if you want to use their maps!
\fBDo not misuse this service by downloading more maps than you need!\fR
You will risk being blocked by these servers, and possibly cause
trouble for the GpsDrive project.

If you must access the internet via a proxy server, set the
\fIHTTP_PROXY\fR or \fIhttp_proxy\fR environment variable to a value like
.I http://proxy.provider.com:3128
where 3128 in this example is the proxy port.


.SS About Maps

GpsDrive stores an index of your maps in a file called "map_koord.txt"
in your ~/.gpsdrive/maps/ directory. You can use another directory for your
maps if you like, to change this set the appropriate directory in the
Preferences menu.

Here is a sample of its contents:

top_WORLD.jpg 0.00000 0.00000 88226037
.br
map_file0000.gif 53.60751 10.01145 3160000
.br
map_file0001.gif 43.08210 12.24552 3160000
.br
map_file0002.gif 49.81574 9.71454 7900000
.br
map_file0003.gif 47.72837 14.46487 592500
.br


The first column is the filename, then comes the latitude, the longitude
and the scale of the map. Typical scales for all of Europe might be
1:10,000,000, and 1:100,000 for a town. To see detailed streets in a city,
choose a scale like 1:10,000 or 1:5,000.

You can figure out the exact "scale" factor by meters/pixel * 2817.947378.
The 2817 number is derived from some ancient screen dpi converted into
pixels/meter.

GpsDrive selects the map with the best scale for your position. So you will
want to get maps of different scales. e.g. You should have maps for Europe,
Austria, and Vienna if you want to drive in Vienna.

.SS European decimal place:

While the decimal points in way.txt must always be a dot ('.'), in
map_koord.txt '.' or ',' are possible. If you download maps from
within the program, GpsDrive writes the map_koord.txt respecting your
LC_NUMERIC setting.


.SS Can I use other maps?

You can also use your own (self drawn, scanned, exported from GIS, ...) maps.
The maps must be in PNG, JPEG, GIF, TIFF, or another common file format
(the format must be recognized by the gdk-pixbuf library).
The lat/long coordinates you write into the "map_koord.txt" file is measured
at the center of the map. The map must have a size of 1280x1024 pixels! 

Important! The maps must be named "map_*" for UTM-like projections
(lat:lon = 1:cos(lat)) and "top_*" for lat/lon Plate carrée projection
(lat:lon = 1:1). The prefix is given so that gpsdrive knows how to
scale the maps correctly. Alternatively the maps can be stored without
prefix in subdirectories of $HOME/.gpsdrive/maps/ which end in "_map" or
"_top". The georeferencing information (center coordinate and scale factor)
for the maps in those subdirectories must be recorded in the main
"map_koord.txt" file, typically stored in the \fI~/.gpsdrive/maps/\fR
directory. To avoid distortion, anything more global than 1:150k to 1:500k
should use "top_*".

Beware if you are using an image originating from a map projection with a
significant deviation between true north and the map projection's local
+y direction (known as the Convergence Angle). \fBGpsDrive\fR assumes that
true north is always directly up! i.e. the Central Meridian of the map
projection is located at the map tile's center. For some map projections
and areas of the country this can be a really bad assumption and your map
will be significantly rotated. This effect is most visible at map scales
covering a large area. This does not affect lat/lon maps.

There is an "import assistant" built in. Use it to import your
non-georeferenced maps. If can be found in the menus under Options -> Maps.


.SH WAYPOINTS AND POI

.SS Importing waypoints
The manual way:

You may create a file "way.txt" in your ~/.gpsdrive directory
which looks like:

DFN-Cert                53.577694    9.991263 FRITZ
.br
Finkenwerder            53.541765    9.842541 AIRPORT
.br
Fritz_Wohnung           53.582700    9.971390 FRITZ

The rows are: {label latitude longitude waypoint-type}.
The label may not exceed 80 characters or contain spaces. Use
underscores (_) in place of spaces, these will automatically be
converted into spaces by the program.
A blank label is denoted by a single underscore.

Latitude and longitude may be in decimal degrees or in the form of
DDDdMM'SS"[NSEW] or DDD:MM:SS[NSEW]. Seconds or minutes and seconds
may be omitted or in decimal form. Thus the following are valid:
42d30'55"N, 75:30.6425W, -46.25.
In fact the delimiters can be anything except numbers, ".", or spaces.

You may omit the waypoint type. 

Following the waypoint-type are (optionally) three space separated
zeros, a proximity radius (in integer meters), and a comment.
Comments follow the same space/underscore rules as label names, and
are limited to 255 characters.

You can create any number of way-*.txt files and chose
between them from the Preferences menu.

There is no need to create the way.txt file yourself, you can add the
waypoints with GpsDrive using the "x" key. See the Help menu.


.SS Add new waypoints
Waypoints created by GpsDrive will be stored in a SQLite database file
locacted at ~/.gpsdrive/waypoints.db.

You can add new waypoints in two simple ways:

o To add a waypoint at the \fBcurrent (GPS) position\fR simply press CTRL
and RIGHT-mouse-click. You can also press the \fBx\fR key for this.

o To add a waypoint at the \fBmouse position\fR, simply press CTRL and
LEFT-mouse-click. You can also press the \fBy\fR key for this.

In the popup window give the waypoint a name (spaces will be converted to
underscores) and choose a waypoint type (see below for predefined
waypoint types).


.SS Waypoint icons
At the moment there a three different icon themes available, but not
all have distinct icons for every type. You can choose the themes
in the \fBPreferences\fR menu.
The possible themes are: "square.big", "square.small" and "classic".


.SS SQL support
For managing a larger number of waypoints SQL support is essential.
Don't be afraid, SQLite doesn't need much in the way of resources,
is very fast, and makes the management (including selection of waypoint
types) of the waypoints much easier. In SQL mode you can select the
waypoints to display in the \fBPreferences\fR menu.


.SH ROUTES

A route is a list of waypoints. GpsDrive guides you from one waypoint
to the next on the route. 

You can add waypoints to a route using the \fIFind\fR waypoint (select
target) window. Find some POIs, then open the \fIRoute Listing\fR window
with the \fBEdit Route\fR button in the \fIFind\fR window or from the
button on the main window. When you click on waypoints in the the Find
window's Results list they will be added to the Route List. Click "Start
Route" when you are ready to begin your journey. It is also possible to
import a complete route from a GPX file.

You can add comments to a waypoint which will be spoken by the speech
system and also be shown in the map window as scrolling text.

.SS Comments for routes
To add comments create a file with the same name as the waypoint file,
but change the suffix to .dsc, i.e way-trip.txt and way-trip.dsc, then
enter comments in the way-*.dsc file in the manner of:

$waypoint_name
Text which is displayed and spoken

$next_waypoint_name
Some more text

Example:

$Fritz_Wohnung
Hier wohnt Fritz, der Autor von diesem Programm. Er freut sich auf
Besuch und eine Einladung zu einem saftigen Steak.
                                                                                
$Hubertus
Hier wohnt Hubertus, ein Freund von Fritz.

There is no limit of the length of the comment. It is important is to
start the line with '$name' and the comment on the following line.


.SS Route planning

There is no shortest-path route planning feature at the moment. We are
keenly watching developments over at the OpenStreetMap project for
utilizing software such as pgRouting and DGLib.


.SH KISMET support
GpsDrive supports \fIkismet\fR.
Kismet is a 802.11b wireless network (WLAN) sniffer. If you have
kismet running, gpsdrive will detect it when the program starts and show
new WLAN access points in real-time on the map. It is necessary to use SQL
mode when using GpsDrive with Kismet. WLAN access points which are already
stored in the SQL database from prior war-drivings are ignored. If you
have enabled GpsDrive's voice output, you will hear information about the
newly found access point.

For more details have a look at the \fIREADME.kismet\fR file.


.SH LOCALISATION

The program will display messages in English, German, French, Italian,
Dutch, Dansk, Hungarian, Slovak, Swedish, Turkish or Spanish if your
language is set either with LANG or LANGUAGE. LANGUAGE overrides all
other settings. Call "locale" to see the settings and call "set" if
LANG or LANGUAGE is set. For German do:

.B export LANGUAGE=de
.br
and then call gpsdrive in this shell.

You can also start it with the line 
.B LANGUAGE=de gpsdrive
without setting the language for the shell.

Sometimes it is necessary use LANG instead of LANGUAGE.

If your own language isn't available, please contact the GpsDrive
Development Team if you want to make the translation. No programming
experience is necessary!


.SH SPEECH OUTPUT

If you want speech output you have to install speech dispatcher and
at least one of the supported speech synthesizers (festival, espeak, ...).
.br
See 
.I http://www.freebsoft.org/speechd
for information.

For German output you can use espeak or the German festival from
.br
.I http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/phonetik/synthesis/index.html

If you have a functional festival software call it as server with:

festival --server

When you start GpsDrive it will detect a running speechd and
speak some status information. When speech output is enabled  an
additional \fIMute\fR button is available to switch off sound output.

GpsDrive tries to use the correct language for your locale.
If the voice used is not correct, you can choose another one in the
\fBPreferences\fR, if installed.


.SH FRIENDSD server

A server program called \fBfriendsd\fR comes with GpsDrive. It acts as
a server for coordinating the position of your friends. After enabling
it in the Preferences menu you can see the position of all GpsDrivers
connected to this server. 

You will see the position of your friends as a car symbol on the map,
including the name, time, day of week and the speed of their last connection.
The blue arrow shows the last reported direction of your friend.

The time is transmitted as UTC, but shown on the display in your local time,
so it is also correct if your friend lives in another time zone.

The server uses port 50123 (UDP), so be sure that you open the port in
your firewall. The server needs no root privileges and should run as a
normal user or a special user with no privileges. The server has NOT been
tested for security.

There is a friends server running on friendsd.gpsdrive.de, you can try it
if you enable it in the settings menu.

You can also send messages to other mobile targets (Options/Send Message)


.SH MAILING LIST

The primary means of support and coordination of program development
happens on the \fBGpsDrive\fR mailing list.

Information about subscription and a searchable archive can be found
at \fIhttp://www.gpsdrive.de/support.shtml\fR.


.SH BUGS
Please send bug reports to the development team! If we don't know about
them we can't fix them and then they remain unfixed. 

File bug reports in our tracker at \fIhttp://bugzilla.gpsdrive.de/\fR.
You will need to create yourself a SourceForge account at that site,
it is rather painless and only takes a minute. This ensures you get
feedback about the bug and we can communicate with you if we need
further information.

Please report the version (\fBgpsdrive --version\fR), screen size, platform,
and as much specific information about how to reproduce the bug as possible.
Whenever possible cut and paste exact error messages and take screenshots.
It is helpful to run gpsdrive for a minute with the -D debug level option
set high and send us the output.

If \fBGpsDrive\fR crashes with a SegFault, we will need a backtrace of the
program as well. Assuming \fBGpsDrive\fR was built with debugging symbols and
the binaries were not stripped of them, create a backtrace by running the
\fBGpsDrive\fR the GNU debugging software as follows:

  \fBgdb `which gpsdrive`\fR

Inside the debugger do:

  \fBrun\fR (if you use command line arguments place these after the word \fBrun\fR)

When you get the SegFault type in:

  \fBbt full\fR

and send us this output. This gives us an indication of exactly what the program
was doing when it broke.


.SH AUTHORS
\fBGpsDrive\fR was originally written by Fritz Ganter. Today it is maintained
and improved by a worldwide team of volunteer developers centered around the
\fIhttp://www.gpsdrive.de\fR website. The source code repository, bug tracker,
and collaborative wiki help site are hosted at \fIhttp://gpsdrive.sourceforge.net\fR.
A partial list of contributing authors can be found in the Help->About menu within
the program.


.SH WARRANTY
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.


.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) 2001-2004 by Fritz Ganter
.br
Copyright (c) 2005-2009 by the members of the GpsDrive Development Team
.br

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version. Indeed, you are encouraged to do so!

.SS This document last modified
$Date$
